
===== PDF p.48 =====
Part I
	
Chapter 1    The History and  Evolution of Java    13
The Java Buzzwords
No discussion of Java’s history is complete without a look at the Java buzzwords. Although 
the fundamental forces that necessitated the invention of Java are portability and security, 
other factors also played an important role in molding the final form of the language. The 
key considerations were summed up by the Java team in the following list of buzzwords:
• Simple
• Secure
• Portable
• Object-oriented
• Robust
• Multithreaded
• Architecture-neutral
• Interpreted
• High performance
• Distributed
• Dynamic
Two of these buzzwords have already been discussed: secure and portable. Let’s examine 
what each of the others implies.
Simple
Java was designed to be easy for the professional programmer to learn and use effectively. 
Assuming that you have some programming experience, you will not find Java hard to master. 
If you already understand the basic concepts of object-oriented programming, learning Java 
will be even easier. Best of all, if you are an experienced C++ programmer, moving to Java will 
require very little effort. Because Java inherits the C/C++ syntax and many of the object-
oriented features of C++, most programmers have little trouble learning Java.
Object-Oriented
Although influenced by its predecessors, Java was not designed to be source-code compatible 
with any other language. This allowed the Java team the freedom to design with a blank slate. 
One outcome of this was a clean, usable, pragmatic approach to objects. Borrowing liberally 
from many seminal object-software environments of the last few decades, Java managed to 
strike a balance between the purist’s “everything is an object” paradigm and the pragmatist’s 
“stay out of my way” model. The object model in Java is simple and easy to extend, while 
primitive types, such as integers, were kept as high-performance nonobjects.
Robust
The multiplatformed environment of the Web places extraordinary demands on a program, 
because the program must execute reliably in a variety of systems. Thus, the ability to

===== PDF p.49 =====
14    PART I    The Java Language
create robust programs was given a high priority in the design of Java. To gain reliability, 
Java restricts you in a few key areas to force you to find your mistakes early in program 
development. At the same time, Java frees you from having to worry about many of the most 
common causes of programming errors. Because Java is a strictly typed language, it checks 
your code at compile time. However, it also checks your code at run time. Many hard-to-
track-down bugs that often turn up in hard-to-reproduce run-time situations are simply 
impossible to create in Java. Knowing that what you have written will behave in a predictable 
way under diverse conditions is a key feature of Java.
To better understand how Java is robust, consider two of the main reasons for 
program failure: memory management mistakes and mishandled exceptional conditions 
(that is, run-time errors). Memory management can be a difficult, tedious task in traditional 
programming environments. For example, in C/C++, the programmer will often manually 
allocate and free dynamic memory. This sometimes leads to problems, because programmers 
will either forget to free memory that has been previously allocated or, worse, try to free some 
memory that another part of their code is still using. Java virtually eliminates these problems 
by managing memory allocation and deallocation for you. (In fact, deallocation is completely 
automatic, because Java provides garbage collection for unused objects.) Exceptional 
conditions in traditional environments often arise in situations such as division by zero or “file 
not found,” and they must be managed with clumsy and hard-to-read constructs. Java helps in 
this area by providing object-oriented exception handling. In a well-written Java program, all 
run-time errors can—and should—be managed by your program.
Multithreaded
Java was designed to meet the real-world requirement of creating interactive, networked 
programs. To accomplish this, Java supports multithreaded programming, which allows 
you to write programs that do many things simultaneously. The Java run-time system 
comes with an elegant yet sophisticated solution for multiprocess synchronization that 
enables you to construct smoothly running interactive systems. Java’s easy-to-use approach 
to multithreading allows you to think about the specific behavior of your program, not the 
multitasking subsystem.
Architecture-Neutral
A central issue for the Java designers was that of code longevity and portability. At the time of 
Java’s creation, one of the main problems facing programmers was that no guarantee existed that 
if you wrote a program today, it would run tomorrow—even on the same machine. Operating 
system upgrades, processor upgrades, and changes in core system resources can all combine to 
make a program malfunction. The Java designers made several hard decisions in the Java 
language and the Java Virtual Machine in an attempt to alter this situation. Their goal was “write 
once; run anywhere, any time, forever.” To a great extent, this goal was accomplished.
Interpreted and High Performance
As described earlier, Java enables the creation of cross-platform programs by compiling into 
an intermediate representation called Java bytecode. This code can be executed on any 
system that implements the Java Virtual Machine. Most previous attempts at cross-platform