
===== PDF p.45 =====
10    PART I    The Java Language
The same application code must work on all computers. Therefore, some means of generating 
portable executable code was needed. As you will soon see, the same mechanism that helps 
ensure security also helps create portability.
Java’s Magic: The Bytecode
The key that allowed Java to solve both the security and the portability problems just described 
is that the output of a Java compiler is not executable code. Rather, it is bytecode. Bytecode is 
a highly optimized set of instructions designed to be executed by what is called the Java 
Virtual Machine (JVM), which is part of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE). In essence, the 
original JVM was designed as an interpreter for bytecode. This may come as a bit of a surprise 
since many modern languages are designed to be compiled into executable code because of 
performance concerns. However, the fact that a Java program is executed by the JVM helps 
solve the major problems associated with web-based programs. Here is why.
Translating a Java program into bytecode makes it much easier to run a program in 
a wide variety of environments because only the JVM needs to be implemented for each 
platform. Once a JRE exists for a given system, any Java program can run on it. Remember, 
although the details of the JVM will differ from platform to platform, all understand the 
same Java bytecode. If a Java program were compiled to native code, then different versions 
of the same program would have to exist for each type of CPU connected to the Internet. 
This is, of course, not a feasible solution. Thus, the execution of bytecode by the JVM is the 
easiest way to create truly portable programs.
The fact that a Java program is executed by the JVM also helps to make it secure. Because 
the JVM is in control, it manages program execution. Thus, it is possible for the JVM to 
create a restricted execution environment, called the sandbox, that contains the program, 
preventing unrestricted access to the machine. Safety is also enhanced by certain restrictions 
that exist in the Java language.
In general, when a program is compiled to an intermediate form and then interpreted by 
a virtual machine, it runs slower than it would run if compiled to executable code. However, 
with Java, the differential between the two is not so great. Because bytecode has been highly 
optimized, the use of bytecode enables the JVM to execute programs much faster than you 
might expect.
Although Java was designed as an interpreted language, there is nothing about Java that 
prevents on-the-fly compilation of bytecode into native code in order to boost performance. 
For this reason, the HotSpot technology was introduced not long after Java’s initial release. 
HotSpot provides a Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler for bytecode. When a JIT compiler is part of 
the JVM, selected portions of bytecode are compiled into executable code in real time, on a 
piece-by-piece, demand basis. It is important to understand that an entire Java program is 
not compiled into executable code all at once. Instead, a JIT compiler compiles code as it is 
needed, during execution. Furthermore, not all sequences of bytecode are compiled—only 
those that will benefit from compilation. The remaining code is simply interpreted. However, 
the just-in-time approach still yields a significant performance boost. Even when dynamic 
compilation is applied to bytecode, the portability and safety features still apply, because the 
JVM is still in charge of the execution environment.

===== PDF p.62 =====
Part I
	
Chapter 2    An Overview of Java    27
As you will see, many of the features supplied by Java are part of its built-in class libraries, 
which do make extensive use of encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism.
A First Simple Program
Now that the basic object-oriented underpinning of Java has been discussed, let’s look at 
some actual Java programs. Let’s start by compiling and running the short sample program 
shown here. As you will see, this involves a little more work than you might imagine.
/*
   This is a simple Java program.
   Call this file "Example.java".
*/
class Example {
  // Your program begins with a call to main().
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("This is a simple Java program.");
  }
}
NOTE  The descriptions that follow use the standard Java SE Development Kit (JDK), which is available 
from Oracle. (Open source versions are also available.) If you are using an integrated development 
environment (IDE), then you will need to follow a different procedure for compiling and executing 
Java programs. In this case, consult your IDE’s documentation for details.
Entering the Program
For some computer languages, the name of the file that holds the source code to a program is 
immaterial. However, this is not the case with Java. The first thing that you must learn about 
Java is that the name you give to a source file is very important. For this example, the name of 
the source file should be Example.java. Let’s see why.
In Java, a source file is officially called a compilation unit. It is a text file that contains (among 
other things) one or more class definitions. (For now, we will be using source files that contain 
only one class.) The Java compiler requires that a source file use the .java filename extension.
As you can see by looking at the program, the name of the class defined by the program 
is also Example. This is not a coincidence. In Java, all code must reside inside a class. By 
convention, the name of the main class should match the name of the file that holds the 
program. You should also make sure that the capitalization of the filename matches the class 
name. The reason for this is that Java is case-sensitive. At this point, the convention that 
filenames correspond to class names may seem arbitrary. However, this convention makes it 
easier to maintain and organize your programs. Furthermore, as you will see later in this 
book, in some cases, it is required.
Compiling the Program
To compile the Example program, execute the compiler, javac, specifying the name of the 
source file on the command line, as shown here:
C:\>javac Example.java

===== PDF p.63 =====
28    PART I    The Java Language
The javac compiler creates a file called Example.class that contains the bytecode version of 
the program. As discussed earlier, the Java bytecode is the intermediate representation of 
your program that contains instructions the Java Virtual Machine will execute. Thus, the 
output of javac is not code that can be directly executed.
To actually run the program, you must use the Java application launcher called java. To 
do so, pass the class name Example as a command-line argument, as shown here:
C:\>java Example
When the program is run, the following output is displayed:
   This is a simple Java program.
When Java source code is compiled, each individual class is put into its own output file 
named after the class and using the .class extension. This is why it is a good idea to give your 
Java source files the same name as the class they contain—the name of the source file will 
match the name of the .class file. When you execute java as just shown, you are actually 
specifying the name of the class that you want to execute. It will automatically search for a 
file by that name that has the .class extension. If it finds the file, it will execute the code 
contained in the specified class.
NOTE  Beginning with JDK 11, Java provides a way to run some types of simple programs directly from a source 
file, without explicitly invoking javac. This technique, which can be useful in some situations, is described in 
Appendix C. For the purposes of this book, it is assumed that you are using the normal compilation process 
just described.
A Closer Look at the First Sample Program
Although Example.java is quite short, it includes several key features that are common to all 
Java programs. Let’s closely examine each part of the program.
The program begins with the following lines:
/*
   This is a simple Java program.
   Call this file "Example.java".
*/
This is a comment. Like most other programming languages, Java lets you enter a remark 
into a program’s source file. The contents of a comment are ignored by the compiler. Instead, 
a comment describes or explains the operation of the program to anyone who is reading its 
source code. In this case, the comment describes the program and reminds you that the 
source file should be called Example.java. Of course, in real applications, comments generally 
explain how some part of the program works or what a specific feature does.
Java supports three styles of comments. The one shown at the top of the program is 
called a multiline comment. This type of comment must begin with /* and end with */. 
Anything between these two comment symbols is ignored by the compiler. As the name 
suggests, a multiline comment may be several lines long.
The next line of code in the program is shown here:
class Example {

===== PDF p.64 =====
Part I
	
Chapter 2    An Overview of Java    29
This line uses the keyword class to declare that a new class is being defined. Example 
is an identifier that is the name of the class. The entire class definition, including all of its 
members, will be between the opening curly brace ({) and the closing curly brace (}). For the 
moment, don’t worry too much about the details of a class except to note that in Java, all 
program activity occurs within one. This is one reason why all Java programs are (at least a 
little bit) object-oriented.
The next line in the program is the single-line comment, shown here:
// Your program begins with a call to main().
This is the second type of comment supported by Java. A single-line comment begins with a // and 
ends at the end of the line. As a general rule, programmers use multiline comments for longer 
remarks and single-line comments for brief, line-by-line descriptions. The third type of comment, 
a documentation comment, will be discussed in the “Comments” section later in this chapter.
The next line of code is shown here:
public static void main(String[] args) {
This line begins the main( ) method. As the comment preceding it suggests, this is the line at 
which the program will begin executing. As a general rule, a Java program begins execution by 
calling main( ). The full meaning of each part of this line cannot be given now, since it involves a 
detailed understanding of Java’s approach to encapsulation. However, since most of the examples 
in the first part of this book will use this line of code, let’s take a brief look at each part now.
The public keyword is an access modifier, which allows the programmer to control the 
visibility of class members. When a class member is preceded by public, then that member may 
be accessed by code outside the class in which it is declared. (The opposite of public is private, 
which prevents a member from being used by code defined outside of its class.) In this case, 
main( ) must be declared as public, since it must be called by code outside of its class when the 
program is started. The keyword static allows main( ) to be called without having to instantiate 
a particular instance of the class. This is necessary since main( ) is called by the Java Virtual 
Machine before any objects are made. The keyword void simply tells the compiler that main( ) 
does not return a value. As you will see, methods may also return values. If all this seems a bit 
confusing, don’t worry. All of these concepts will be discussed in detail in subsequent chapters.
As stated, main( ) is the method called when a Java application begins. Keep in mind that 
Java is case-sensitive. Thus, Main is different from main. It is important to understand that 
the Java compiler will compile classes that do not contain a main( ) method. But java has no 
way to run these classes. So, if you had typed Main instead of main, the compiler would still 
compile your program. However, java would report an error because it would be unable to 
find the main( ) method.
Any information that you need to pass to a method is received by variables specified within 
the set of parentheses that follow the name of the method. These variables are called parameters. 
If there are no parameters required for a given method, you still need to include the empty 
parentheses. In main( ), there is only one parameter, albeit a complicated one. String[ ] args 
declares a parameter named args, which is an array of instances of the class String. (Arrays are 
collections of similar objects.) Objects of type String store character strings. In this case, args 
receives any command-line arguments present when the program is executed. This program 
does not make use of this information, but other programs shown later in this book will.

===== PDF p.65 =====
30    PART I    The Java Language
The last character on the line is the {. This signals the start of main( )’s body. All of the 
code that comprises a method will occur between the method’s opening curly brace and its 
closing curly brace.
One other point: main( ) is simply a starting place for your program. A complex program 
will have dozens of classes, only one of which will need to have a main( ) method to get 
things started. Furthermore, for some types of programs, you won’t need main( ) at all. 
However, for most of the programs shown in this book, main( ) is required.
The next line of code is shown here. Notice that it occurs inside main( ).
System.out.println("This is a simple Java program.");
This line outputs the string "This is a simple Java program." followed by a new line on the 
screen. Output is actually accomplished by the built-in println( ) method. In this case, println( ) 
displays the string which is passed to it. As you will see, println( ) can be used to display other 
types of information, too. The line begins with System.out. While too complicated to explain 
in detail at this time, briefly, System is a predefined class that provides access to the system, 
and out is the output stream that is connected to the console.
As you have probably guessed, console output (and input) is not used frequently in most 
real-world Java applications. Since most modern computing environments are graphical in 
nature, console I/O is used mostly for simple utility programs, demonstration programs, and 
server-side code. Later in this book, you will learn other ways to generate output using Java. 
But for now, we will continue to use the console I/O methods.
Notice that the println( ) statement ends with a semicolon. Many statements in Java end 
with a semicolon. As you will see, the semicolon is an important part of the Java syntax.
The first } in the program ends main( ), and the last } ends the Example class definition.
A Second Short Program
Perhaps no other concept is more fundamental to a programming language than that of a 
variable. As you may know, a variable is a named memory location that may be assigned a 
value by your program. The value of a variable may be changed during the execution of the 
program. The next program shows how a variable is declared and how it is assigned a value. 
The program also illustrates some new aspects of console output. As the comments 
at the top of the program state, you should call this file Example2.java.
/*
   Here is another short example.
   Call this file "Example2.java".
*/

class Example2 {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int num; // this declares a variable called num

    num = 100; // this assigns num the value 100

    System.out.println("This is num: " + num);

    num = num * 2;

===== PDF p.66 =====
Part I
	
Chapter 2    An Overview of Java    31
    System.out.print("The value of num * 2 is ");
    System.out.println(num);
  }
}
When you run this program, you will see the following output:
   This is num: 100
   The value of num * 2 is 200
Let’s take a close look at why this output is generated. The first new line in the program 
is shown here:
int num; // this declares a variable called num
This line declares an integer variable called num. Java (like many other languages) requires 
that variables be declared before they are used.
Following is the general form of a variable declaration:
type var-name;
Here, type specifies the type of variable being declared, and var-name is the name of the 
variable. If you want to declare more than one variable of the specified type, you may use a 
comma-separated list of variable names. Java defines several data types, including integer, 
character, and floating-point. The keyword int specifies an integer type.
In the program, the line
num = 100; // this assigns num the value 100
assigns to num the value 100. In Java, the assignment operator is a single equal sign.
The next line of code outputs the value of num preceded by the string "This is num:".
System.out.println("This is num: " + num);
In this statement, the plus sign causes the value of num to be appended to the string that 
precedes it, and then the resulting string is output. (Actually, num is first converted from an 
integer into its string equivalent and then concatenated with the string that precedes it. This 
process is described in detail later in this book.) This approach can be generalized. Using the + 
operator, you can join together as many items as you want within a single println( ) statement.
The next line of code assigns num the value of num times 2. Like most other languages, 
Java uses the * operator to indicate multiplication. After this line executes, num will contain 
the value 200.
Here are the next two lines in the program:
System.out.print ("The value of num * 2 is ");
System.out.println (num);
Several new things are occurring here. First, the built-in method print( ) is used to display 
the string "The value of num * 2 is ". This string is not followed by a newline. This means that 
when the next output is generated, it will start on the same line. The print( ) method is just 
like println( ), except that it does not output a newline character after each call. Now look at 
the call to println( ). Notice that num is used by itself. Both print( ) and println( ) can be 
used to output values of any of Java’s built-in types.

===== PDF p.69 =====
34    PART I    The Java Language
   This is x: 4
   This is x: 5
   This is x: 6
   This is x: 7
   This is x: 8
   This is x: 9
In this example, x is the loop control variable. It is initialized to zero in the initialization 
portion of the for. At the start of each iteration (including the first one), the conditional test 
x < 10 is performed. If the outcome of this test is true, the println( ) statement is executed, 
and then the iteration portion of the loop is executed, which increases x by 1. This process 
continues until the conditional test is false.
As a point of interest, in professionally written Java programs you will almost never see 
the iteration portion of the loop written as shown in the preceding program. That is, you will 
seldom see statements like this:
x = x + 1;
The reason is that Java includes a special increment operator which performs this operation 
more efficiently. The increment operator is ++. (That is, two plus signs back to back.) The 
increment operator increases its operand by one. By use of the increment operator, the 
preceding statement can be written like this:
x++;
Thus, the for in the preceding program will usually be written like this:
for(x = 0; x<10; x++)
You might want to try this. As you will see, the loop still runs exactly the same as it did before.
Java also provides a decrement operator, which is specified as – –. This operator 
decreases its operand by one.
Using Blocks of Code
Java allows two or more statements to be grouped into blocks of code, also called code blocks. 
This is done by enclosing the statements between opening and closing curly braces. Once a 
block of code has been created, it becomes a logical unit that can be used any place that a 
single statement can. For example, a block can be a target for Java’s if and for statements. 
Consider this if statement:
if(x < y) { // begin a block
  x = y;
  y = 0;
} // end of block
Here, if x is less than y, then both statements inside the block will be executed. Thus, the two 
statements inside the block form a logical unit, and one statement cannot execute without 
the other also executing. The key point here is that whenever you need to logically link two 
or more statements, you do so by creating a block.

===== PDF p.70 =====
Part I
	
Chapter 2    An Overview of Java    35
Let’s look at another example. The following program uses a block of code as the target 
of a for loop.
/*
  Demonstrate a block of code.

  Call this file "BlockTest.java"
*/
class BlockTest {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int x, y;

    y = 20;

    // the target of this loop is a block
    for(x = 0; x<10; x++) {
      System.out.println("This is x: " + x);
      System.out.println("This is y: " + y);
      y = y - 2;
   }
  }
}
The output generated by this program is shown here:
   This is x: 0
   This is y: 20
   This is x: 1
   This is y: 18
   This is x: 2
   This is y: 16
   This is x: 3
   This is y: 14
   This is x: 4
   This is y: 12
   This is x: 5
   This is y: 10
   This is x: 6
   This is y: 8
   This is x: 7
   This is y: 6
   This is x: 8
   This is y: 4
   This is x: 9
   This is y: 2
In this case, the target of the for loop is a block of code and not just a single statement. 
Thus, each time the loop iterates, the three statements inside the block will be executed. This 
fact is, of course, evidenced by the output generated by the program.
As you will see later in this book, blocks of code have additional properties and uses. 
However, the main reason for their existence is to create logically inseparable units of code.

===== PDF p.71 =====
36    PART I    The Java Language
Lexical Issues
Now that you have seen several short Java programs, it is time to more formally describe the 
atomic elements of Java. Java programs are a collection of whitespace, identifiers, literals, 
comments, operators, separators, and keywords. The operators are described in the next 
chapter. The others are described next.
Whitespace
Java is a free-form language. This means that you do not need to follow any special 
indentation rules. For instance, the Example program could have been written all on one 
line or in any other strange way you felt like typing it, as long as there was at least one 
whitespace character between each token that was not already delineated by an operator 
or separator. In Java, whitespace includes a space, tab, newline, or form feed.
Identifiers
Identifiers are used to name things, such as classes, variables, and methods. An identifier may 
be any descriptive sequence of uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, or the underscore 
and dollar-sign characters. (The dollar-sign character is not intended for general use.) They 
must not begin with a number, lest they be confused with a numeric literal. Again, Java is case-
sensitive, so VALUE is a different identifier than Value. Some examples of valid identifiers are
AvgTemp
count
a4
$test
this_is_ok
Invalid identifier names include these:
2count
high-temp
Not/ok
NOTE  Beginning with JDK 9, the underscore cannot be used by itself as an identifier.
Literals
A constant value in Java is created by using a literal representation of it. For example, here 
are some literals:
100
98.6
‘X’
“This is a test”
Left to right, the first literal specifies an integer, the next is a floating-point value, the third is 
a character constant, and the last is a string. A literal can be used anywhere a value of its type 
is allowed.
Comments
As mentioned, there are three types of comments defined by Java. You have already seen two: 
single-line and multiline. The third type is called a documentation comment. This type of

===== PDF p.72 =====
Part I
	
Chapter 2    An Overview of Java    37
comment is used to produce an HTML file that documents your program. The documentation 
comment begins with a /** and ends with a */. Documentation comments are explained in 
Appendix A.
Separators
In Java, there are a few characters that are used as separators. The most commonly used 
separator in Java is the semicolon. As you have seen, it is often used to terminate statements. 
The separators are shown in the following table:
Symbol
Name
Purpose
( )
Parentheses
Used to contain lists of parameters in method definition and invocation. 
Also used for defining precedence in expressions, containing 
expressions in control statements, and surrounding cast types.
{ }
Braces
Used to contain the values of automatically initialized arrays. Also 
used to define a block of code, for classes, methods, and local scopes.
[ ]
Brackets
Used to declare array types. Also used when dereferencing array values.
;
Semicolon
Terminates statements.
,
Comma
Separates consecutive identifiers in a variable declaration. Also used 
to chain statements together inside a for statement.
.
Period
Used to separate package names from subpackages and classes. Also 
used to separate a variable or method from a reference variable.
::
Colons
Used to create a method or constructor reference. 
...
Ellipsis
Indicates a variable-arity parameter.
@
At-sign
Begins an annotation.
The Java Keywords
There are 67 keywords currently defined in the Java language (see Table 2-1). These 
keywords, combined with the syntax of the operators and separators, form the foundation 
of the Java language. In general, keywords cannot be used as identifiers, meaning that they 
cannot be used as names for a variable, class, or method. However, 16 of the keywords are 
context-sensitive, which means that they are only keywords when used with the feature to 
which they relate. They support features added to Java over the past few years. Ten relate to 
modules: exports, module, open, opens, provides, requires, to, transitive, uses, and with. 
Records are declared by record; sealed classes and interfaces use sealed, non-sealed, and 
permits; yield is used by the enhanced switch; and var supports local variable type inference. 
Because they are context-sensitive, existing programs were unaffected by their addition. 
Also, beginning with JDK 9, an underscore by itself is considered a keyword in order to 
prevent its use as the name of something in your program. Beginning with JDK 17, strictfp 
has been rendered obsolete because it has no effect.
The keywords const and goto are reserved but not used. In the early days of Java, several 
other keywords were reserved for possible future use. However, the current specification for 
Java defines only the keywords shown in Table 2-1.

===== PDF p.73 =====
38    PART I    The Java Language
In addition to the keywords, Java reserves three other names that have been part of Java 
from the start: true, false, and null. These are values defined by Java. You may not use these 
words for the names of variables, classes, and so on.
The Java Class Libraries
The sample programs shown in this chapter make use of two of Java’s built-in methods: 
println( ) and print( ). As mentioned, these methods are available through System.out.
System is a class predefined by Java that is automatically included in your programs. In the 
larger view, the Java environment relies on several built-in class libraries that contain many 
built-in methods that provide support for such things as I/O, string handling, networking, 
and graphics. The standard classes also provide support for a graphical user interface (GUI). 
Thus, Java as a totality is a combination of the Java language itself, plus its standard classes. 
As you will see, the class libraries provide much of the functionality that comes with Java. 
Indeed, part of becoming a Java programmer is learning to use the standard Java classes. 
Throughout Part I of this book, various elements of the standard library classes and methods 
are described as needed. In Part II, several class libraries are described in detail.
Table 2-1 
Java Keywords
abstract 
assert 
boolean 
break 
byte 
case 
catch 
char 
class 
const 
continue 
default 
do 
double 
else 
enum 
exports 
extends 
final 
finally 
float 
for 
goto 
if 
implements 
import 
instanceof 
int 
interface 
long 
module 
native 
new 
non-sealed
open 
opens
package 
permits
private 
protected 
provides 
public 
record
requires 
return 
sealed
short 
static 
strictfp 
super 
switch 
synchronized 
this 
throw 
throws 
to 
transient 
transitive 
try 
uses 
var
void 
volatile 
while 
with
yield
_